draft-ietf-uta-require-tls13.md, before:

---
title: "New Protocols Must Require TLS 1.3"
abbrev: "require-tls1.3"
category: bcp
updates: 9325

docname: draft-ietf-uta-require-tls13-latest
submissiontype: IETF
number:
date:
consensus: true
v: 3
area: "Security"
workgroup: "Using TLS in Applications"
keyword:
 - TLS
 - features
venue:
  group: "Using TLS in Applications"
  type: "Working Group"
  mail: "uta@ietf.org"
  github: "richsalz/draft-use-tls13"

author:
-
  fullname: Rich Salz
  organization: Akamai Technologies
  email: rsalz@akamai.com
-
  fullname: Nimrod Aviram
  email: nimrod.aviram@gmail.com

normative:
  TLS12: RFC5246
  TLS13: I-D.draft-ietf-tls-rfc8446bis
  TLS12FROZEN: I-D.draft-ietf-tls-tls12-frozen

informative:
  QUICTLS: RFC9001
  DNSTLS: RFC8310
  PQC:
    target: https://www.nist.gov/cybersecurity/what-post-quantum-cryptography
    date: "August, 2024"
    title: What Is Post-Quantum Cryptography?
  TRIPLESHAKE:
    target: https://mitls.org/pages/attacks/3SHAKE
    title: Triple Handshakes Considered Harmful Breaking and Fixing Authentication over TLS
  RENEG1:
    title: Understanding the TLS Renegotiation Attack
    author:
      name: Eric Rescorla
    target: https://web.archive.org/web/20091231034700/http://www.educatedguesswork.org/2009/11/understanding_the_tls_renegoti.html
  RENEG2:
    title: Authentication Gap in TLS Renegotiation
    author:
      - name: Marsh Ray
    target: https://web.archive.org/web/20091228061844/http://extendedsubset.com/?p=8
  LUCKY13:
    title: "Lucky Thirteen: Breaking the TLS and DTLS record protocols"
    target: http://www.isg.rhul.ac.uk/tls/TLStiming.pdf
    author:
      - ins: N. J. Al Fardan
      - ins: K. G. Paterson
  LUCKY13FIX:
    title: "Systematic fuzzing and testing of TLS libraries"
    target: https://nds.rub.de/media/nds/veroeffentlichungen/2016/10/19/tls-attacker-ccs16.pdf
    author:
      name: Juraj Somorovsky
  CBCSCANNING:
    title: Scalable Scanning and Automatic Classification of TLS Padding Oracle Vulnerabilities
    target: https://www.usenix.org/system/files/sec19-merget.pdf
    author:
      - name: Robert Merget
      - name: Juraj Somorovsky
      - name: Nimrod Aviram
      - name: Craig Young
      - name: Janis Fliegenschmidt
      - name: JÃ¶rg Schwenk
      - name: Yuval Shavitt
  BEAST:
    title: "Here come the xor ninjas"
    target: http://www.hpcc.ecs.soton.ac.uk/dan/talks/bullrun/Beast.pdf
    author:
      - name: Thai Duong
      - name: Juliano Rizzo
  WEAKDH:
    title: "Imperfect forward secrecy: How Diffie-Hellman fails in practice"
    target: https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/2810103.2813707
    author:
      - ins: D. Adrian
      - ins: K. Bhargavan
      - ins: Z. Durumeric
      - ins: P. Gaudry
      - ins: M. Green
      - ins: J. A.Halderman
      - ins: N. Heninger
      - ins: D. Springall
      - ins: E. ThomÃ©
      - ins: L. Valenta
      - ins: B. VanderSloot
  FREAK:
    title: "A messy state of the union: Taming the composite state machines of TLS"
    target: https://inria.hal.science/hal-01114250/file/messy-state-of-the-union-oakland15.pdf
    author:
      - name: Benjamin Beurdouche
      - name: Karthikeyan Bhargavan
      - name: Antoine Delignat-Lavaud
      - name: CÃ©dric Fournet
      - name: Markulf Kohlweiss
      - name: Alfredo Pironti
      - name: Pierre-Yves Strub
      - name: Jean Karim Zinzindohoue
  SLOTH:
    title: "Transcript collision attacks: Breaking authentication in TLS, IKE, and SSH"
    target: https://inria.hal.science/hal-01244855/file/SLOTH_NDSS16.pdf
    author:
      - name: Karthikeyan Bhargavan
      - name: GaÃ«tan Leurent

--- abstract

TLS 1.2 is in use and can be configured such that it provides good security
properties. TLS 1.3 use is increasing, and fixes some known deficiencies
with TLS
1.2, such as removing error-prone cryptographic primitives and encrypting
more of the traffic so that it is not readable by outsiders.
For these reasons, new protocols must require and
assume the existence of TLS 1.3.
As DTLS 1.3 is not widely available or deployed,
this prescription does not pertain to DTLS (in any DTLS version); it pertains to
TLS only.

This document updates RFC9325.

--- middle

# Introduction {#sec-reasons}

TLS 1.2 {{TLS12}} is in use and can be configured such that
it provides good
security properties. However, this protocol version suffers from several
deficiencies:

1. While application layer traffic is always encrypted, most of the handshake
messages are not. Therefore, the privacy provided is suboptimal.
This is a protocol issue that cannot be addressed by configuration.

2. The list of cryptographic primitives specified for the protocol, both in-use
primitives and deprecated ones, includes several primitives that have
been a source for
vulnerabilities throughout the years, such as RSA key exchange, CBC cipher suites,
and problematic finite-field Diffie-Hellman group negotiation.
These issues could be addressed through proper configuration; however,
experience shows that configuration mistakes are common, especially when
deploying cryptography.
See {{sec-considerations}} for elaboration.

3. The base protocol does not provide security against some
types of attacks (see {{sec-considerations}});
extensions are required to provide
security.

TLS 1.3 {{TLS13}} is also in
widespread use and fixes most known deficiencies with TLS 1.2, such as
encrypting more of the traffic so that it is not readable by outsiders and
removing most cryptographic primitives considered dangerous. Importantly, TLS
1.3 enjoys robust security proofs and provides excellent security without
any additional configuration.

This document specifies that, since TLS 1.3 use is widespread, new protocols
must require and assume its existence.
It updates {{RFC9325}} as described in {{rfc9325-updates}}.
As DTLS 1.3 is not widely available or deployed,
this prescription does not pertain to DTLS (in any DTLS version); it pertains to
TLS only.

# Conventions and Definitions

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

# Implications for post-quantum cryptography

Cryptographically-relevant quantum computers, once available, will
have a huge impact on TLS traffic. To mitigate this, TLS applications
will need to migrate to post-quantum cryptography [PQC].

For TLS it is important to note that the focus of these efforts is TLS 1.3
or later, and that TLS 1.2 will not be supported (see {{TLS12FROZEN}}).
This is one more reason for new protocols to default to TLS 1.3, where
post-quantum cryptography is expected to be supported.

# TLS Use by Other Protocols and Applications

Any new protocol that uses TLS MUST specify as its default TLS 1.3.
For example, QUIC {{QUICTLS}} requires TLS 1.3 and specifies that endpoints
MUST terminate the connection if an older version is used.

If deployment considerations are a concern, the protocol MAY specify TLS 1.2 as
an additional, non-default option.
As a counter example, the Usage Profile for DNS over TLS {{DNSTLS}} specifies
TLS 1.2 as the default, while also allowing TLS 1.3.
For newer specifications that choose to support TLS 1.2, those preferences are
to be reversed.

The initial TLS handshake allows a client to specify which versions of
the TLS protocol it supports and the server is intended to pick the highest
version that it also supports.
This is known as the "TLS version negotiation," and
many TLS libraries provide a way for applications to specify the range
of versions.
When the API allows it, clients SHOULD specify just the minimum version they
want.
This MUST be TLS 1.3 or TLS 1.2, depending on the circumstances described
in the above paragraphs.

# Changes to RFC 9325 {#rfc9325-updates}

RFC 9325 provides recommendations for ensuring the security of deployed
services that use TLS and, unlike this document, DTLS as well.
At this time it was published, it described availability of TLS 1.3
as "widely available." The transition and adoption mentioned in that
documnent has grown, and this document now makes two small changes
to the recommendations in {{RFC9325, Section 3.1.1}}:

- That section says that TLS 1.3 SHOULD be supported; this document says
that for new protocols it MUST be supported.

- That section says that TLS 1.2 MUST be supported; this document says that
it MAY be supported as described above.

Again, these changes only apply to TLS, and not DTLS.

# Security Considerations {#sec-considerations}

TLS 1.2 was specified with several cryptographic primitives and design choices
that have, over time, weakened its security. The purpose of this section is to
briefly survey several such prominent problems that have affected the protocol.
It should be noted, however, that TLS 1.2 can be configured securely; it is
merely much more difficult to configure it securely as opposed to using its
modern successor, TLS 1.3. See {{!RFC9325}} for a more thorough guide on the
secure deployment of TLS 1.2.

Firstly, the TLS 1.2 protocol, without any extension points, is vulnerable to
renegotiation attacks (see {{RENEG1}} and {{RENEG2}})  and the
Triple Handshake attack (see {{TRIPLESHAKE}}).
Broadly, these attacks
exploit the protocol's support for renegotiation in order to inject a prefix
chosen by the attacker into the plaintext stream. This is usually a devastating
threat in practice, that allows e.g. obtaining secret cookies in a web setting.
In light of
the above problems, {{?RFC5746}} specifies an extension that prevents this
category of attacks. To securely deploy TLS 1.2, either renegotiation must be
disabled entirely, or this extension must be used. Additionally, clients must
not allow servers to renegotiate the certificate during a connection.

Secondly, the original key exchange methods specified for the protocol, namely
RSA key exchange and finite field Diffie-Hellman, suffer from several
weaknesses. Similarly, to securely deploy the protocol, these key exchange
methods must be disabled.
See {{?I-D.draft-ietf-tls-deprecate-obsolete-kex}} for details.

Thirdly, symmetric ciphers which were widely-used in the protocol, namely RC4
and CBC cipher suites, suffer from several weaknesses. RC4 suffers from
exploitable biases in its key stream; see {{?RFC7465}}. CBC cipher suites have
been a source of vulnerabilities throughout the years. A straightforward
implementation of these cipher suites inherently suffers from the Lucky13 timing
attack {{LUCKY13}}. The first attempt to implement the cipher suites in
constant time introduced an even more severe vulnerability {{LUCKY13FIX}}.
There have been further similar vulnerabilities throughout the
years exploiting CBC cipher suites; refer to e.g. {{CBCSCANNING}}
for an example and a survey of similar works.

And lastly, historically the protocol was affected by several other attacks that
TLS 1.3 is immune to:
BEAST {{BEAST}}, Logjam {{WEAKDH}}, FREAK {{FREAK}}, and SLOTH {{SLOTH}}.

# IANA Considerations {#iana}

This document makes no requests to IANA.

--- back

Commit message:

Caveats about threat model for PQC
In response to Geoff's DNSDIR review and discussion.

draft-ietf-uta-require-tls13.md, after:

---
title: "New Protocols Must Require TLS 1.3"
abbrev: "require-tls1.3"
category: bcp
updates: 9325

docname: draft-ietf-uta-require-tls13-latest
submissiontype: IETF
number:
date:
consensus: true
v: 3
area: "Security"
workgroup: "Using TLS in Applications"
keyword:
 - TLS
 - features
venue:
  group: "Using TLS in Applications"
  type: "Working Group"
  mail: "uta@ietf.org"
  github: "richsalz/draft-use-tls13"

author:
-
  fullname: Rich Salz
  organization: Akamai Technologies
  email: rsalz@akamai.com
-
  fullname: Nimrod Aviram
  email: nimrod.aviram@gmail.com

normative:
  TLS12: RFC5246
  TLS13: I-D.draft-ietf-tls-rfc8446bis
  TLS12FROZEN: I-D.draft-ietf-tls-tls12-frozen

informative:
  QUICTLS: RFC9001
  DNSTLS: RFC8310
  PQC:
    target: https://www.nist.gov/cybersecurity/what-post-quantum-cryptography
    date: "August, 2024"
    title: What Is Post-Quantum Cryptography?
  TRIPLESHAKE:
    target: https://mitls.org/pages/attacks/3SHAKE
    title: Triple Handshakes Considered Harmful Breaking and Fixing Authentication over TLS
  RENEG1:
    title: Understanding the TLS Renegotiation Attack
    author:
      name: Eric Rescorla
    target: https://web.archive.org/web/20091231034700/http://www.educatedguesswork.org/2009/11/understanding_the_tls_renegoti.html
  RENEG2:
    title: Authentication Gap in TLS Renegotiation
    author:
      - name: Marsh Ray
    target: https://web.archive.org/web/20091228061844/http://extendedsubset.com/?p=8
  LUCKY13:
    title: "Lucky Thirteen: Breaking the TLS and DTLS record protocols"
    target: http://www.isg.rhul.ac.uk/tls/TLStiming.pdf
    author:
      - ins: N. J. Al Fardan
      - ins: K. G. Paterson
  LUCKY13FIX:
    title: "Systematic fuzzing and testing of TLS libraries"
    target: https://nds.rub.de/media/nds/veroeffentlichungen/2016/10/19/tls-attacker-ccs16.pdf
    author:
      name: Juraj Somorovsky
  CBCSCANNING:
    title: Scalable Scanning and Automatic Classification of TLS Padding Oracle Vulnerabilities
    target: https://www.usenix.org/system/files/sec19-merget.pdf
    author:
      - name: Robert Merget
      - name: Juraj Somorovsky
      - name: Nimrod Aviram
      - name: Craig Young
      - name: Janis Fliegenschmidt
      - name: JÃ¶rg Schwenk
      - name: Yuval Shavitt
  BEAST:
    title: "Here come the xor ninjas"
    target: http://www.hpcc.ecs.soton.ac.uk/dan/talks/bullrun/Beast.pdf
    author:
      - name: Thai Duong
      - name: Juliano Rizzo
  WEAKDH:
    title: "Imperfect forward secrecy: How Diffie-Hellman fails in practice"
    target: https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/2810103.2813707
    author:
      - ins: D. Adrian
      - ins: K. Bhargavan
      - ins: Z. Durumeric
      - ins: P. Gaudry
      - ins: M. Green
      - ins: J. A.Halderman
      - ins: N. Heninger
      - ins: D. Springall
      - ins: E. ThomÃ©
      - ins: L. Valenta
      - ins: B. VanderSloot
  FREAK:
    title: "A messy state of the union: Taming the composite state machines of TLS"
    target: https://inria.hal.science/hal-01114250/file/messy-state-of-the-union-oakland15.pdf
    author:
      - name: Benjamin Beurdouche
      - name: Karthikeyan Bhargavan
      - name: Antoine Delignat-Lavaud
      - name: CÃ©dric Fournet
      - name: Markulf Kohlweiss
      - name: Alfredo Pironti
      - name: Pierre-Yves Strub
      - name: Jean Karim Zinzindohoue
  SLOTH:
    title: "Transcript collision attacks: Breaking authentication in TLS, IKE, and SSH"
    target: https://inria.hal.science/hal-01244855/file/SLOTH_NDSS16.pdf
    author:
      - name: Karthikeyan Bhargavan
      - name: GaÃ«tan Leurent

--- abstract

TLS 1.2 is in use and can be configured such that it provides good security
properties. TLS 1.3 use is increasing, and fixes some known deficiencies
with TLS
1.2, such as removing error-prone cryptographic primitives and encrypting
more of the traffic so that it is not readable by outsiders.
For these reasons, new protocols must require and
assume the existence of TLS 1.3.
As DTLS 1.3 is not widely available or deployed,
this prescription does not pertain to DTLS (in any DTLS version); it pertains to
TLS only.

This document updates RFC9325.

--- middle

# Introduction {#sec-reasons}

TLS 1.2 {{TLS12}} is in use and can be configured such that
it provides good
security properties. However, this protocol version suffers from several
deficiencies:

1. While application layer traffic is always encrypted, most of the handshake
messages are not. Therefore, the privacy provided is suboptimal.
This is a protocol issue that cannot be addressed by configuration.

2. The list of cryptographic primitives specified for the protocol, both in-use
primitives and deprecated ones, includes several primitives that have
been a source for
vulnerabilities throughout the years, such as RSA key exchange, CBC cipher suites,
and problematic finite-field Diffie-Hellman group negotiation.
These issues could be addressed through proper configuration; however,
experience shows that configuration mistakes are common, especially when
deploying cryptography.
See {{sec-considerations}} for elaboration.

3. The base protocol does not provide security against some
types of attacks (see {{sec-considerations}});
extensions are required to provide
security.

TLS 1.3 {{TLS13}} is also in
widespread use and fixes most known deficiencies with TLS 1.2, such as
encrypting more of the traffic so that it is not readable by outsiders and
removing most cryptographic primitives considered dangerous. Importantly, TLS
1.3 enjoys robust security proofs and provides excellent security without
any additional configuration.

This document specifies that, since TLS 1.3 use is widespread, new protocols
must require and assume its existence.
It updates {{RFC9325}} as described in {{rfc9325-updates}}.
As DTLS 1.3 is not widely available or deployed,
this prescription does not pertain to DTLS (in any DTLS version); it pertains to
TLS only.

# Conventions and Definitions

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

# Implications for post-quantum cryptography

Cryptographically-relevant quantum computers (CRQC), once available, will
have a huge impact on TLS traffic. To mitigate this, TLS applications
will need to migrate to post-quantum cryptography (PQC) [PQC].
Detailed consideration of when any application requires PQC, or when
a CRQC is a threat they need to protect against, is beyond the
scope of this document.

For TLS it is important to note that the focus of these efforts is TLS 1.3
or later, and that TLS 1.2 will not be supported (see {{TLS12FROZEN}}).
This is one more reason for new protocols to default to TLS 1.3, where
PQC is actively being standardized, as this gives new applications
the option to use PQC.

# TLS Use by Other Protocols and Applications

Any new protocol that uses TLS MUST specify as its default TLS 1.3.
For example, QUIC {{QUICTLS}} requires TLS 1.3 and specifies that endpoints
MUST terminate the connection if an older version is used.

If deployment considerations are a concern, the protocol MAY specify TLS 1.2 as
an additional, non-default option.
As a counter example, the Usage Profile for DNS over TLS {{DNSTLS}} specifies
TLS 1.2 as the default, while also allowing TLS 1.3.
For newer specifications that choose to support TLS 1.2, those preferences are
to be reversed.

The initial TLS handshake allows a client to specify which versions of
the TLS protocol it supports and the server is intended to pick the highest
version that it also supports.
This is known as the "TLS version negotiation," and
many TLS libraries provide a way for applications to specify the range
of versions.
When the API allows it, clients SHOULD specify just the minimum version they
want.
This MUST be TLS 1.3 or TLS 1.2, depending on the circumstances described
in the above paragraphs.

# Changes to RFC 9325 {#rfc9325-updates}

RFC 9325 provides recommendations for ensuring the security of deployed
services that use TLS and, unlike this document, DTLS as well.
At this time it was published, it described availability of TLS 1.3
as "widely available." The transition and adoption mentioned in that
documnent has grown, and this document now makes two small changes
to the recommendations in {{RFC9325, Section 3.1.1}}:

- That section says that TLS 1.3 SHOULD be supported; this document says
that for new protocols it MUST be supported.

- That section says that TLS 1.2 MUST be supported; this document says that
it MAY be supported as described above.

Again, these changes only apply to TLS, and not DTLS.

# Security Considerations {#sec-considerations}

TLS 1.2 was specified with several cryptographic primitives and design choices
that have, over time, weakened its security. The purpose of this section is to
briefly survey several such prominent problems that have affected the protocol.
It should be noted, however, that TLS 1.2 can be configured securely; it is
merely much more difficult to configure it securely as opposed to using its
modern successor, TLS 1.3. See {{!RFC9325}} for a more thorough guide on the
secure deployment of TLS 1.2.

Firstly, the TLS 1.2 protocol, without any extension points, is vulnerable to
renegotiation attacks (see {{RENEG1}} and {{RENEG2}})  and the
Triple Handshake attack (see {{TRIPLESHAKE}}).
Broadly, these attacks
exploit the protocol's support for renegotiation in order to inject a prefix
chosen by the attacker into the plaintext stream. This is usually a devastating
threat in practice, that allows e.g. obtaining secret cookies in a web setting.
In light of
the above problems, {{?RFC5746}} specifies an extension that prevents this
category of attacks. To securely deploy TLS 1.2, either renegotiation must be
disabled entirely, or this extension must be used. Additionally, clients must
not allow servers to renegotiate the certificate during a connection.

Secondly, the original key exchange methods specified for the protocol, namely
RSA key exchange and finite field Diffie-Hellman, suffer from several
weaknesses. Similarly, to securely deploy the protocol, these key exchange
methods must be disabled.
See {{?I-D.draft-ietf-tls-deprecate-obsolete-kex}} for details.

Thirdly, symmetric ciphers which were widely-used in the protocol, namely RC4
and CBC cipher suites, suffer from several weaknesses. RC4 suffers from
exploitable biases in its key stream; see {{?RFC7465}}. CBC cipher suites have
been a source of vulnerabilities throughout the years. A straightforward
implementation of these cipher suites inherently suffers from the Lucky13 timing
attack {{LUCKY13}}. The first attempt to implement the cipher suites in
constant time introduced an even more severe vulnerability {{LUCKY13FIX}}.
There have been further similar vulnerabilities throughout the
years exploiting CBC cipher suites; refer to e.g. {{CBCSCANNING}}
for an example and a survey of similar works.

And lastly, historically the protocol was affected by several other attacks that
TLS 1.3 is immune to:
BEAST {{BEAST}}, Logjam {{WEAKDH}}, FREAK {{FREAK}}, and SLOTH {{SLOTH}}.

# IANA Considerations {#iana}

This document makes no requests to IANA.

--- back
